---
layout: post
title: Shrinking the size of a monorepo
author: maciej.piotrowski
tags: [tech, ios, git, mobile, swift, objectivec]
---

The source code of Allegro iOS  app for buyers used to be divided into separate modules hosted on multiple repositories
(poyrepo). The
source code was migrated to a monorepo a few years back along with the history of all repos that constituted the app.
Our main
repository for the iOS application has become our monorepo. After 9 years of development of the app the repo size has
grown
enormously and the `git clone` command became a nightmare taking too much time. We had a possibility to shrink the
project size during the
migration from an on-premise to an external git repo hosting provider.

## Monorepo scale

### General repo scale

The  General scale of our old repository was as follows:

- almost 9 years of history with  **91k +** commits
- **440k** [BLOBs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_large_object) were stored in the repo: multiple `.png` and
`.jpeg` files, 3rd-party frameworks and toolset binaries. The unpacked size of the BLOBs would add up to **36 GB** and
the biggest BLOB stored was **100+ MB**
- **680k** git  *tree* objects
- the unpacked repo size on the main development branch was **8+ GB**  where the `.git` dir size after a clone was
**7+ GB**. The `.git` directory contained compressed `.png` (**4.5+ GB** 🤯) and `.pbxproj` (**600+ MB**) files

### New repo scale

After the migration and history rewrite we shrank the repo size to:

- **71k +** commits
- **230k** [BLOBs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_large_object), where all BLOBs unpacked would add up to
**1.6 GB** - this
number also includes size of source code files, whereas assets and binaries were migrated to an external storage
- **455k+** git  *tree* objects

## How did we do it?

The history-rewrite process required proper planning and a few steps:
1. Analysis of the old repo contents and its history
1. Creating a reproducible procedure for the history rewrite
1. Dry running the procedure to test out the process
1. Planning and scheduling activities involved to migrate the repo
1. Proper communication about the process to stakeholders (a.k.a. developers 👩‍💻👨‍💻)
1. The actual migration

### The repo analysis

Goals:
- find items that can be removed from the history
- select items that can be migrated to an external storage

We used tools such as [git-sizer](https://github.com/github/git-sizer) and
[git-filter-repo tool](https://github.com/newren/git-filter-repo) to
get information about types of files stored in the repository. If you wanted to do the same the workshops from
[GitHub Universe](https://githubuniverse.com/professional-services-workshop-2-how-to-keep-git-monorepos-manageable/) and
[the scripts introduced there](https://github.com/githubuniverseworkshops/grafting-monorepos/issues/2) might be a good
starting point.

From the analysis we were able to select the following items for entire removal from the history:

- deleted dirs and files
- unwanted paths: e.g. `Pods/`, invalid symlinks causing deep nesting of paths
- unwanted history of paths: e.g.  `Vendor` for storing 3rd party dependencies or  `Toolset` with binaries
- unwanted files: .e.g `.pbxproj`that can be generated by [XcodeGen](https://github.com/yonaskolb/XcodeGen) and their
history is meaningless (**600+ MB** savings in our case),  history of BLOB files  such as `.jpg`, `.png`, `.a`,
`.dylib`, `.pdf`, `.zip`, `.mp4`, `.json`

We decided to track BLOBs by the [Git LFS \(Large File Storage\)](https://git-lfs.github.com/). In our case the
following were a good suit for it:
- large binary files  `.jpg`, `.png`, `.a`, `.dylib`, `.pdf`, `.zip`, `.mp4`, `.json`
- framework binaries
- toolset binaries

### Reproducible procedure and dry runs

We created a script that contained all commands that removed redundant items from the history. To remove items we used
[git filter-repo](https://github.com/newren/git-filter-repo) - it‘s way much more performant than git‘s built-in
 `git filter-branch` (do not use it!). Some examples of usage:

```

git filter-repo --invert-paths --path Pods/ --force
git filter-repo --invert-paths --paths-from-file remove.txt --force
git filter-repo --invert-paths --path-glob '*.pbxproj' --force

```

After the removal we restored the most-recent version of binaries, frameworks and BLOBs to the repo and we tracked them
with Git LFS:

```

git lfs track "*.png"
git lfs track "Vendor/SomeSDK/SomeSDK.framework/SomeSDK"

```

We have run the script a few times to verify the output size of the repo. One crucial aspect after the run was to verify
that **all plans** on the CI (Continuous Integration) pass - we did it to check that the app still compiles, tests pass
and no more files that the ones we had wanted were actually deleted.

### Communication

Crucial aspect of introducing any change is communication. It‘s good to prepare it in advance, have team members to
review it. We used a few channels so that our devs would get important info about the migration and history rewrite on
the channel that suits best their working habits (e-mails, instant messaging tool, dev forums).

    ## Some final thoughts

It took a large amount of time time to prepare the migration, understand the history of the repository and select proper
items and
strategies for the migration. The links here might be a good starting point if you wanted to rewrite histories of your
overweight repos:

- [GitHub Universe Workshops](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bk7akV8nyAM) and corresponding
[repository](https://github.com/githubuniverseworkshops/grafting-monorepos)
- [git-sizer](https://github.com/github/git-sizer)
- [git filter-repo](https://github.com/newren/git-filter-repo)

When creating a plan for the rewrite remember to have a checklist that you can use to verify outcomes and to remember
all the steps involved in the process. Plan the history rewrite (along with the migration, which was in our case) for
the time that folks would not want to
push code to the repo. We used Friday evening, and yes, we had to fix some issues over the weekend - not everything
went smoothly.

You can have a copy of your old repository in a READ ONLY mode on the servers - it will serve as a **backup** and will
contain the actual history.
