---
layout: post
title: "Server-driven UI for mobile apps"
author: [paulina.sadowska]
tags: [tech, "Server-driven UI", mobile, mbox]
excerpt: >
    In this article, we want to share our approach to using server-side rendering in native mobile apps.
    In 2019 we created the first version of the in-house server-driven rendering tool called MBox and used it to render the
    main page in the Allegro app on Android and iOS. We have come a long way since then, and now we use this tool to render
    more and more screens in the Allegro apps.
    After almost three years of working on MBox, we want to share how it works and the key advantages of
    using this approach.
---

In this article, we want to share our approach to using server-side rendering in native mobile apps.

In 2019 we created the first version of the in-house server-driven rendering tool called MBox and used it to render the
main page in the Allegro app on Android and iOS. We have come a long way since then, and now we use this tool to render
more and more screens in the Allegro apps.

After almost three years of working on MBox, we want to share how it works and the key advantages of using this approach.

## Why server-driven UI?

The idea behind MBox was to make mobile development faster without compromising the app quality. Implementing the
feature twice for Android and iOS takes a lot of time and requires two people with unique skill sets (knowledge of
Android and iOS frameworks). There is also the risk that both apps will not behave consistently because each person may
interpret the requirements slightly differently.

Using server-side rendering solves that problem because each business feature is implemented only once on the backend
service. That gives us consistency out of the box and shortens the time needed to implement the feature. Also,
developers don't need to know mobile frameworks to develop for mobile anymore.

Another advantage of server-side rendering is that it allows releasing features independently from the release train. We
can deploy changes multiple times a day and when something goes wrong - roll back to the previous version immediately.
It gives teams a lot more flexibility and allows them to experiment and iterate much faster. What is more, deployed
changes are visible to all clients, no matter which app version they use.

## How does MBox work?

### Defining the screen layout

While designing MBox, we wanted to create a tool that will give developers total flexibility to implement any layout
they need - as long as it's consistent with our design system, Metrum.

That's why MBox screens are built using primitive components, which our rendering libraries map to native views.

// TODO - OBRAZEK Z ROZBICIEM EKRANU NA KOMPONENTY MBOXOWE

Developers can arrange MBox components freely using different types of containers that MBox supports (`flex-container`,
`stack-container`, `absolute-container`, `list-container`, etc.). Those components can be styled and configured to match
different business scenarios.

MBox renders components on mobile apps consistently, but it also respects slight differences unique to the Android or
iOS platform. That gives MBox screens a native look and feel and perfectly blends in with parts of the app developed
natively, without MBox. We even needed to add a new developer option: a label that shows which parts of the app are
rendered by MBox. Because even for mobile developers, MBox and pure native screens were, in many cases,
indistinguishable.

### What about more complex views?

Creating more complex reusable views is also possible. For example, our design system specifies something called the
message: an element with a vertical line, an icon, and some texts and buttons. However, because this element is complex
and its requirements may change over time, it's defined on the backend service as a widget - the element that developers
can reuse across different screens.

// TODO obrazek metrum message i rozbicie na elementy MBoxowe

If the requirements for the message widget change, we can easily change it on the backend side without the need to
release the app. That's because it's not defined directly in the MBox libraries included in the mobile apps but
specified on the backend using MBox components.

### Unified tracking

Besides defining layouts, MBox also allows us to specify track events on the backend.

For tracking events, consistency is crucial. If events are not triggered under the same scenarios and with the same data
on both platforms, it's hard to compare the data and make business decisions.

MBox solves that problem. All events tracked on MBox screens are defined on the backend, meaning unified tracking
between Android and iOS and across different app versions.

### Testing

Since the MBox rendering engine is a core of more and more screens in the app, it had to be thoroughly covered by unit
tests and integration tests. We also have screenshot tests that ensure that MBox components render correctly. That
allows us to find out early about the possible regressions.

Teams that develop screens using MBox also have various tools that allow them to test their features. They can write
unit tests in the MBox backend service and check if correct MBox components are created for a given data. They can also
add an URL of their page to the Visual Regression. A screenshot of this page is done whenever someone commits anything
to the MBox backend and If any change is detected, the author would be automatically notified in their Pull Request.

Feature teams can also write UI tests for the native apps to test how their page integrates with the rest of the app and
if all interactions work as expected. However, those tests have to be written on both platforms by the mobile developers
and should take into account that the content of the page under tests can be changed on the backend.

## The journey to make MBox interactive

When we started working on MBox, we were focused mainly on pages that contain a lot of frequently changing content but
not many interactions with users. In the first version of MBox, it was possible to define only basic actions like
opening a new screen or adding an offer to the cart. That changed gradually when the new teams started using MBox.

To make MBox more interactive, we used the same atomic approach we adopted when designing MBox layout components. We
gradually added generic actions that were not custom-made to serve specific business features but were reusable across
different use cases.

### For example:

One of the first challenges that we faced was allowing the implementation of an “add to watched” star in MBox. We
could've just added the ”watched star” component that checks if a user is logged in (redirects to the login page if it's
not), adds an offer to the watched, and changes the star icon from empty to full. In the short term, it should have been
easier. But it's not a way that would allow MBox to scale.

Instead, we designed a couple of atomic mechanisms that allow building this feature on the backend and could be reused
in the future in different use cases.

We added a logic component called `multivariant` that allows changing one component into another thanks to the
`changeVariant` action. That enabled us to switch the star icon from empty to full. Next, we added the `sendRequest` action
that sends requests with given URL, headers, and other data to our services. That allows adding and removing an offer to
and from the watched list. Lastly, we added the `loginInNeeded` action that allows checking if an user is logged in and
redirecting to the login screen if needed. That allows ensuring the user is logged in before making the request.

// TODO - obrazek schemat rozbicie akcji dla “add to watched” star

Of course, doing it this way took much more time than just implementing the ”add to watched” component in MBox libraries
natively. But it's the way that scales and gives us flexibility.

Over time mechanisms that we designed earlier were reused on other screens. And more and more often, when the new team
wanted to use MBox on their screen, most of the building blocks they needed were already there. And it definitely
wouldn't be the case if not for our atomic approach.

## How does MBox connect to other parts of the Allegro ecosystem?

Consistency across mobile platforms is not everything. Another important aspect of our work is making sure mobile and
web platforms are as consistent as possible, respecting native differences that make each platform unique.

MBox integrates with our content management system, also used for the web (Opbox Page Manager). The screen's content
configured in the admin panel is sent through the Opbox services to the MBox backend service. The MBox service maps the
data into MBox components that make up the MBox screen. Then the screen definition in JSON format is sent to apps and is
rendered using native views.

The same data from Opbox is also used to render the web equivalent of the same screen. Opbox defines its own mappings
for the web: Opbox Components, which describe how to map the data into HTML elements that make up the Allegro web pages.

// TODO - obrazek z architektura

Integration with the Opbox gives us a lot of advantages. Very often, to change the content in the app and web, you don't
need to change the code at all - all you need to do is change the content in the admin panel.

Another huge advantage is that we have unified tracking between all platforms and can use the same tools for A/B testing
that are used for the web. Previously code for A/B tests had to be written for each mobile platform separately in native
code and then cleaned up after the finished experiment. Now, some experiments work out of the box since Opbox sends
different data to MBox depending on the experiment variant the user falls into. Sometimes a little bit of code in the
MBox backend is required to conduct an experiment, but it's not comparable to the amount of work A/B tests take when
they're performed in the native code without MBox.

## Conclusions

MBox is a tool that changed how we work on mobile apps in Allegro. It allowed us to shorten the development time without
compromising the quality and stability of the app and without losing the native look and feel of the Allegro apps.

We have come a long way during those three years since we started working on MBox. At first, our ambition was to create
a tool that would be used on content screens with very few interactions. Over time we pushed the boundaries of what MBox
is capable of and entered screens with more and more interactions with the user.

Currently MBox is used on over 25 screens in Allegro mobile apps and the number is still growing. In the first half of
2022 alone, 27 teams made changes to the app using MBox and created about 300 Pull Requests. We deployed changes over
100 times which means ~4.15 releases a week.

We're confident that it's not the end of the possibilities ahead of us. We still see how we can make MBox even more
powerful. We'd love to shorten development time even more by providing tools that allow defining MBox screens in
TypeScript. That'll enable developers to reuse some parts of the code between mobile and web and take advantage of
better tools such as hot reload. Another thing we're currently focused on is adding the binding mechanism to MBox and
the client-side logic to allow defining the business logic on the backend. Implementing those mechanisms will allow
introducing even more interactivity into MBox screens.

But that is the topic for the following articles. Stay tuned!
